 Previous   Next   
 
 
 
 
 (photo: davidf/iStock by Getty Images)   
 
 
 Data Points Denmark’s Ambitious Green Vision   
 By  Nicoletta Batini  and  Miguel Segoviano 
 Denmark aspires to become one of the most climate-friendly countries in the world. In June, its Parliament overwhelmingly   passed   a new climate law that aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 70 percent below 1990 levels by 2030, with net zero emissions targeted for 2050.  
 This is an even more ambitious goal than the   EU’s target to cut emissions by 55 percent  over the same time period. 
 
 70% 
 Amount by which Denmark plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 relative to 1990 levels 
 
   
 A new   IMF staff paper   takes a closer look at Denmark’s green strategy and proposes a few adjustments to help the country realize its ambitious goals. In line with earlier IMF recommendations, the paper proposes a comprehensive strategy with enhanced carbon pricing, reinforced by fiscal incentives across different sectors. It also urges using revenues from carbon pricing to cut labor taxes. 
 The package proposed in the paper would provide powerful incentives for climate mitigation, while shielding households and firms from higher energy prices. Crucially, the paper argues, spreading measures to different sectors is a good way to avoid carbon prices that are too high, capping them at half the level currently suggested by the Danish Council for Climate Change. The economic cost from this lower carbon price would be fairly low—estimated at about 0.2 percent of GDP. 
 “Feebates”— fees  on products with high emissions combined with  rebates  on products with low emissions—are recommended for sectors with high emissions. They could be especially useful to curb Denmark’s large agricultural emissions from the country’s huge number of farmed animals. Because feebates raise the costs of producers who farm unsustainably but reward them as they shift to sustainable farming, this program can deliver a fair low-carbon transition that preserves profitability and jobs. 
 By crafting an effective climate policy that protects the majority of people, Denmark’s strategy to make large cuts in its emissions could be more attainable. 
  AddThis Advanced Settings above via filter on the_content   AddThis Advanced Settings below via filter on the_content   AddThis Advanced Settings generic via filter on the_content   AddThis Share Buttons above via filter on the_content   AddThis Share Buttons below via filter on the_content   AddThis Share Buttons generic via filter on the_content    
 IMFBlog 2021-05-05T10:32:32-04:00 January 11, 2021 |   
 
 
						Related Posts					 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metals Demand From Energy Transition May Top Current Global Supply 
 
 
 December 8, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Soaring Metal Prices May Delay Energy Transition 
 
 
 November 10, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not Yet on Track: Climate Threat Demands More Ambitious Global Action 
 
 
 October 31, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How Investment Funds Can Drive the Green Transition 
 
 
 October 4, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
  fusion-carousel-holder  
 
 
 
 
  fusion-carousel-positioner  
  fusion-carousel  
  related-posts  
 
 
 
 Get IMF Blog Email Updates   SUBSCRIBE NOW 
 Coronavirus Related Issues Other IMF Blogs   
 
 Other IMF Work   
 Country Focus 
 Podcasts 
 Videos 
 Finance & Development Magazine 
 
 
 About the Blog   IMFBlog is a forum for the views of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff and officials on pressing economic and policy issues of the day.  
 The views expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF and its Executive Board. 
 
   
    fusion-row  
    #main  
 
 
 
 
 
 
		Copyright 2021  International Monetary Fund SUBSCRIBE TO IMF BLOG UPDATES   
 
 
 Twitter Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Flickr 
    fusion-fusion-copyright-content  
    fusion-row  
    #footer  
    fusion-footer  
 
 
    wrapper  
    #boxed-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  GovDelivery Subscription Overlay  
 
  End GovDelivery Overlay    
 
 
 Go to Top 
 
 
