 Previous   Next   
 
 
 
 
 (Image: Davide Bonazzi)   
 
 
 The Haves and Have-nots Of the Digital Age   
 By  Gita Bhatt 
 Accelerated by the pandemic, the digital future is coming at us faster than ever before, and maybe faster than we can imagine. In this issue of  Finance & Development   magazine, we explore the possible consequences—the good, the bad, and the gray. 
 For millions, technology has been a lifeline, changing the way we work, learn, shop, and entertain ourselves. In a year like no other, it has spurred game-changing digital shifts. Governments moved quickly, using mobile solutions to provide cash assistance; financial technology has helped the survival, and in some cases, growth of small- and medium-sized businesses; and the   first national digital currency, in The Bahamas , provides a glimpse of the future of money. 
 Despite the promise of digital transformation, it can also drive unequal outcomes in education, opportunities, and access to health care and financial services. Automation has destroyed jobs, some permanently. The chasm between the digitally connected and the unconnected—across and within countries and between rural and urban areas—has amplified social and economic inequalities. 
 MIT’s  Daron Acemoğlu underscores   that the government can and should play a regulatory role, with incentives for innovation toward “human-friendly” technologies that produce good jobs.  Hyun Song Shin and coauthors  from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) elaborate on smart policies that can bring more people—particularly the poorest—into the financial system. And   Sierra Leone’s Minister of Education, David Sengeh, describes   in an interview how he has made his country’s education system both more digital and more inclusive. 
 Clearly for such initiatives to succeed, as  Cristina Duarte,  special advisor on Africa to the UN Secretary General emphasizes, countries must scale up investment in digital infrastructure, such as access to electricity, mobile and internet coverage, and digital ID. 
 Still, there are real risks:   Tim Maurer  at the Carnegie Institute for International Peace focuses on addressing cyber threats to the financial system. IMF economists  Yan Carrière-Swallow and Vikram Haksar suggest   that commercial interests must be balanced with protection of privacy and data integrity. Other contributors illuminate   digital taxation ,   data bias and ethics , and the need for   global tech cooperation . 
 Digitalization can transform economies and lives. The key takeaway: innovation needs to have public value and be shaped to bring everyone into the digital age. 
 Elsewhere in this issue, IMF chief economist   Gita Gopinath highlights   in a Straight Talk column the stark divergence in prospects across countries, regions, and sectors and the needed policy actions on several fronts.   Sam Bowles and Wendy Carlin advance   the view that the pandemic, along with climate change, will alter thinking about economics and the social contract. And authors   Ruchir Agarwal, Ina Ganguli, and Patrick Gaule find   that policies that help identify and nurture young talent from poorer countries could advance the global knowledge frontier. 
 Finally, Prakash Loungani profiles   Tel Aviv University’s Assaf Razin , early scholar of the promise and perils of globalization. 
 Read  full issue  here. 
 
   
   
  AddThis Advanced Settings above via filter on the_content   AddThis Advanced Settings below via filter on the_content   AddThis Advanced Settings generic via filter on the_content   AddThis Share Buttons above via filter on the_content   AddThis Share Buttons below via filter on the_content   AddThis Share Buttons generic via filter on the_content    
 IMFBlog 2021-05-13T12:50:15-04:00 March 1, 2021 |   
 
 
						Related Posts					 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Global Crypto Regulation Should be Comprehensive, Consistent, and Coordinated   
 
 
 December 9, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metals Demand From Energy Transition May Top Current Global Supply 
 
 
 December 8, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Economics of Health and Well-Being 
 
 
 December 2, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sovereign Domestic Debt Restructuring: Handle with Care 
 
 
 December 1, 2021 
  fusion-carousel-meta  
  fusion-carousel-item-wrapper  
 
  fusion-carousel-holder  
 
 
 
 
  fusion-carousel-positioner  
  fusion-carousel  
  related-posts  
 
 
 
 Get IMF Blog Email Updates   SUBSCRIBE NOW 
 Coronavirus Related Issues Other IMF Blogs   
 
 Other IMF Work   
 Country Focus 
 Podcasts 
 Videos 
 Finance & Development Magazine 
 
 
 About the Blog   IMFBlog is a forum for the views of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff and officials on pressing economic and policy issues of the day.  
 The views expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF and its Executive Board. 
 
   
    fusion-row  
    #main  
 
 
 
 
 
 
		Copyright 2021  International Monetary Fund SUBSCRIBE TO IMF BLOG UPDATES   
 
 
 Twitter Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Flickr 
    fusion-fusion-copyright-content  
    fusion-row  
    #footer  
    fusion-footer  
 
 
    wrapper  
    #boxed-wrapper  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  GovDelivery Subscription Overlay  
 
  End GovDelivery Overlay    
 
 
 Go to Top 
 
 
